In May 2011, one year after the former airport had been opened to the public, 8000 square metres of Tempelhof Field were allocated to three urban garden projects.
Today, there are around 600 people cultivating the beds.
The exuberant green island is a complex universe interrupting the vastness of the field.
For some, the gardens are a political statement, for others a space for ecological or social experiments:
All gardens are freely accessible and not fenced in.
This is us.
Our sunflower is growing beautifully.
Jerusalem artichoke is a kind of sweet potato.
It grows very tall
and has beautiful yellow flowers –
like a small sunflower.
Jerusalem artichoke is a root vegetable,
very easy to grow.
It grows on its own.
Just like potatoes.
The tuber tastes a bit like an artichoke.
It’s not about saving the world in some fancy way
but about saving ourselves.
I call it a self-help project.
In Brooklyn we were in an area
where there are no supermarkets
because everybody is living on social welfare.
And it’s not enough money
to shop in a supermarket.
So the supermarkets closed.
The alternative is that people learn very quickly
how to produce their own food.
In the street.
On their balcony.
And that’s what we’re practising here.
Learning by doing.
The whole idea is that it’s a communal effort,
not an individual one.
You look at what your neighbours are doing.
And as you will see, some do it very well –
really well –
while others are only just learning.
Hey Andrea, how are you?
This is a Genovese pumpkin.
Here, take this.
Is that a blanket?
Yes, it’s for slapping people.
I’m leaving at the end of August.
Everything is open, there is no fence.
And somehow people are very respectful.
Like in a museum.
They usually behave as if they were in an art exhibition.
Sometimes they even feel like
they are attending a “happening”.
It’s very interesting.
I wanted to live near Tempelhof Field
because it’s rare to have such a huge field
with so many possibilities in a city.
And there’s nobody complaining about me sitting in someone’s garden,
someone’s little allotment that has a fence and a lock.
Instead, you can sit really comfortably
and just mess around a bit.
There are a few shady spots as well.
You can always hear sounds
and you never know where there might be other people...
And suddenly someone gets up who might have been lying down
listening to you jamming the whole time.
We never wanted to have a fence around our gardens.
We aren’t allowed to put one up either, that’s in our contract.
Of course completely free access can be problematic
because not everybody understands
that the vegetables should be left to the people who cultivated them,
who planted them, watered them, looked after them for months.
Instead people come and think anyone can help themselves,
do whatever they want and take whatever they want.
In that sense, we are constantly having to educate people.
Last year we were very happy
because we had one radish to share between four of us.
It was our first radish and we were delighted with it.
It’s just nice to see things grow and then be able to eat them,
even if we don’t harvest much.
It’s fun to be doing something together.
You can’t take it too seriously.
Sometimes the vegetables disappear
because people just think they’re free.
And that’s ok, but it just means you can’t take the whole thing too seriously.
That’s how I see it.